                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                    CLEMENTINE EDR ARCHIVE SIS                                
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                              Prepared by:                                    
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                               Eric Eliason                                   
                   Planetary Data System - Imaging Node                       
                           Branch of Astrogeology                             
                       United States Geological Survey                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
                              Erick Malaret                                   
                       Applied Coherent Technology                            
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                             October 1, 1994                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
1. INTRODUCTION                                                               
2. CLEMENTINE IMAGE ARCHIVE COLLECTION                                        
2.1 RAW CLEMENTINE IMAGES                                                     
2.2 REQUANTIZATION MATRICES FOR DATA DECOMPRESSION                            
2.3 BROWSE IMAGES                                                             
2.4 GEOMETRIC ELEMENTS                                                        
2.5 RADIOMETRIC ELEMENTS                                                      
2.6 INDEX ELEMENTS                                                            
2.7 DOCUMENTATION ELEMENTS                                                    
2.8 SOFTWARE ELEMENTS                                                         
3. ARCHIVE DESIGN                                                             
3.1 PDS STANDARDS                                                             
3.2 "STATIC" AND "DYNAMIC" DATA VOLUMES                                       
3.3 HANDLING ERRORS                                                           
4. FILE NAMING CONVENTIONS                                                    
5. DIRECTORY STRUCTURE AND CONTENTS FOR "STATIC" VOLUMES                      
5.1 DIRECTORY CONTENTS                                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
1. INTRODUCTION                                                               
                                                                              
This Software Interface Specification (SIS) describes the organization        
and contents of the Clementine Archive Collection of Raw Imaging Data.        
The archive collection consists of a single volume set that contains the      
primary data products and ancillary data for the UV/Visible (UV/VIS),         
Near-Infrared (NIR), Long Wavelength Infrared (LWIR), LIDAR High              
Resolution (HiRes) and star-tracker cameras. The raw data are pristine        
in the sense that they contain the artifacts, and radiometric and             
geometric characteristics of unprocessed and uncorrected data. The only       
processing performed on the data is to organize and format the data           
according to Planetary Data System (PDS) standards.                           
                                                                              
The Clementine Archive Collection is a deliverable product to the             
Planetary Data System and the scientific community that it supports. All      
data formats are based on the PDS standard, version 3.0, as documented        
in the PDS Standards Reference [JPL Document D-7669, November 1992,           
available through the PDS]. Derived and processed images produced by the      
active flight-operations team supported by the Naval Research laboratory      
(NRL) or produced by the NASA Science Team are not addressed in this          
SIS. Clementine derived products are expected to be generated primarily       
by post-mission data analysis programs supported by NASA. These products      
will be delivered to the PDS under a separate arrangement.                    
                                                                              
An overview of the ancillary data products that will accompany the            
archive of EDR image data products is discussed. However, as of this          
writing (October 1, 1994) the details associated with the ancillary data      
volumes are not yet in place. The ancillary data products such as             
calibration correction files, SPICE kernels, and prelaunch calibration        
data, are still in preparation by the Lawrence Livermore National             
Laboratory, NASA funded post-mission investigators, the PDS NAIF Node,        
and the PDS Imaging Node. The ancillary data products are to be               
organized on the "dynamic" data volumes of the archive. (Please see           
section 3 for a discussion of "dynamic" data volumes.)                        
                                                                              
2. CLEMENTINE IMAGE ARCHIVE COLLECTION                                        
                                                                              
Archive-quality data sets include everything needed to understand and         
utilize the data. The images archived by themselves are insufficient for      
the science community to realize the full scientific potential of the         
data. Thus, it is necessary to provide as part of the archive the             
necessary ancillary data to perform colorimetric, photometric, and            
cartographic processing. Software tools need to be included as part of        
the archive to decompress, display, and calibrate the image data              
products. Documentation is necessary to describe the data products,           
imaging instruments, and mission operations. Table 1 summarizes the           
elements required to fully utilize the image collection. Each element is      
discussed individually.                                                       
                                                                              
The term "archive" describes the total data collection needed to fully        
utilize the EDR image collection. The archive is stored on CD-ROM media       
and is divided into static and dynamic data volumes. The static data          
volumes contain the EDR image data products. The dynamic data volumes         
contain the ancillary data necessary to utilize the image collection.         
(Please see section 3. for a more detailed discussion on the contents         
and organization of the static and dynamic data volumes that make up the      
archive.)                                                                     
                                                                              
         Table 1 - Essential Elements of the Image Archive                    
                                                                              
         1. Primary Image Data Set. These are the raw images as               
            acquired by the mission. Images remain in "lossy"                 
            compressed format to reduce the data volume of the                
            archive.                                                          
                                                                              
         2. Requantization matrices for data decompression.                   
                                                                              
         3. Browse Image Data Set. Sub-sampled images in an                   
            uncompressed format for rapid browsing of the                     
            image collection.                                                 
                                                                              
         4. Geometric Elements. Data and information characterizing           
            the geometric properties of the imaging systems.                  
                                                                              
         5. Radiometric Elements. Data and information characterizing         
            the radiometric properties of the imaging instruments.            
                                                                              
         6. Index Elements. Tables summarizing the properties and             
            characteristics of all images in the archive.                     
                                                                              
         7. Documentation Elements. Computer readable files describing        
            the mission, spacecraft, imaging instruments, mission             
            operations, and software.                                         
                                                                              
         8. Computer Software Elements. Provides instrument-specific          
            computer-processing capabilities for the images. Software         
            allows general planetary science community to access the          
            images without costly software development.                       
                                                                              
2.1 Raw Clementine Images                                                     
                                                                              
The primary data archived is the collection of raw planetary images           
acquired by the Clementine mission. These data are pristine in the sense      
that they contain the artifacts and the radiometric and geometric             
characteristics of unprocessed and uncorrected data.  The only                
processing performed on the data is to organize and format the data           
according to PDS standards.                                                   
                                                                              
The Clementine images are compressed onboard the spacecraft using a           
space-hardened Matra chip. The compression enables acquisition of many        
more observations of the Moon. The compression technique performs             
"lossy" compression and contains a Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT) in         
the algorithm. The images remain in the compressed format when they are       
archived to reduce the total volume of the archive collection.                
                                                                              
The Clementine images are constructed according to the data object            
concepts developed by the PDS. By adopting the PDS formats, the               
Clementine images will be consistent in content and organization with         
the other planetary image collections that have been archived by the          
PDS. The "Clementine EDR Image SIS" contains a description of the             
EDR image data products.                                                      
                                                                              
2.2 Requantization Matrices for Data Decompression                            
                                                                              
The requantization matrix for the DCT compression algorithm is modified       
throughout the course of a mapping cycle as the viewing conditions and        
science requirements change. The requantization matrix used for an image      
is carried as part of the image object within a compressed image file.        
                                                                              
2.3 Browse Images                                                             
                                                                              
A set of browse images is provided as part of the archive to facilitate       
rapid viewing of the image collection. Browse images are used to              
visually search for areas of interest. If a browse image shows a              
potentially interesting scene, the image can be decompressed for more         
detailed inspection. Browse images are not in a compressed format, but        
they are reduced in size by averaging NxN pixel neighborhoods of the          
original image. The average is stored as a single pixel in the browse         
image. A browse image is stored in a secondary object in the image file.      
                                                                              
2.4 Geometric Elements                                                        
                                                                              
The geometric elements are an essential part of the archive; they             
contain the data and information to characterize the geometric                
properties of the imaging systems, and to fully describe the viewing          
geometry of a scene. These data are essential to geodetic, cartographic,      
and photometric applications.                                                 
                                                                              
The geometric elements are organized according to the SPICE kernel            
concepts adopted by the Navigational Ancillary Information Facility           
(NAIF) at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. SPICE is an acronym for              
Spacecraft, Planet, Instrument, C-matrix, and Event kernels.                  
                                                                              
The SPICE kernel data set will be provided on the dynamic data volumes        
that accompany the EDR data products. SPICE kernels evolve and improve        
as further analysis is done. The analysis could include correcting not-       
yet-discovered errors and filling in missing items. It is recommended         
that persons needing the most complete and accurate observation geometry      
contact NAIF for the latest Clementine SPICE files.                           
                                                                              
The PDS data labels attached to the image data products are based on the      
most up-to-date SPICE information available at the time of product            
creation.                                                                     
                                                                              
2.5 Radiometric Elements                                                      
                                                                              
The data and information characterizing the radiometric properties of         
the imaging systems are an essential part of the archive. These               
ancillary data make it possible to perform colorimetric and photometric       
processing on the image collection. Table 2 shows the data and                
information required to characterize and correct for the radiometric          
properties of the imaging data. The radiometric elements will be              
provided on the dynamic data volumes that accompany the EDR data              
products.                                                                     
                                                                              
           Table 2 - Radiometric Elements for the Image Archive               
                                                                              
  1. Pre-launch camera calibration data. These data are flat-field            
     observations acquired under a variety of ambient temperature             
     conditions, filter wheel settings, light level settings, and             
     the full compliment camera mode settings.                                
                                                                              
  2. Derived calibration files for relative radiometric correction.           
     These files contain gain and dark current corrections for                
     intra-camera performance.                                                
                                                                              
  3. Derived coefficients for absolute radiometric calibration.               
                                                                              
  4. Tables describing camera sensitivity and dark current                    
     drift.                                                                   
                                                                              
  5. Tables of camera blemishes and dead detector positions,                  
     and fixed-pattern noise.                                                 
                                                                              
  6. Tables of spectral responsivity for each pass band.                      
                                                                              
The pre-launch calibration data consist of images acquired by the             
imaging instruments in a controlled laboratory environment. The image         
target is a flat-field of known radiance. The observations are made           
under a variety of temperature conditions, filter wheel settings, and         
camera mode settings. With these data, the performance of the camera can      
be determined and radiometric correction files can be derived.                
Additionally, these observations are used to characterize coherent- and       
fixed-noise problems such as blemishes and dead detectors. The Lawrence       
Livermore National Laboratory includes these data on the ancillary data       
volumes that accompany the EDR data products.                                 
                                                                              
Calibration files for radiometric correction are included as part of the      
archive. These files include dark current and gain correction files for       
relative calibration (intra-camera correction), derived coefficients for      
absolute radiometric correction, and tables that define camera                
sensitivity and dark current drift. The calibration data files are to be      
prepared by post-mission data analysis investigators and will be made         
available as part of the ancillary data volumes that accompany the EDR        
data products.                                                                
                                                                              
The camera modes, camera temperatures, exposure times, filter wheel           
settings, and other parameters that effect the calibration of an image        
are stored as part of the E-kernel of the SPICE system. This data is          
available as part of the ancillary data volumes that accompany the EDR        
data products.  Additionally, the information is provided in the PDS          
labels of the image files and the index data tables that accompany the        
data set.                                                                     
                                                                              
The tables of camera blemishes, dead detectors, fixed pattern noise, and      
spectral band widths of the optical filters are stored as part of the I-      
kernel of the SPICE system. This data are available as part of the            
dynamic data volumes that will accompany the EDR data products.               
                                                                              
2.6 Index Elements                                                            
                                                                              
The index elements of the archive exist as summary tables describing the      
camera characteristics and viewing geometry of the images in the              
archive. Each static data volume contains an index file for the               
images on the volume.                                                         
                                                                              
The index elements can be loaded into a catalog system for use in image       
search and retrieval applications. The table is organized as a flat           
file; each row is an image entry, and each column contains an attribute       
of the image. Part of the index table acts as the E-kernel, containing        
the camera settings such as filter wheel position, exposure duration,         
camera modes, and camera temperatures. The index table also contains          
"user friendly" geometric parameters that describe the viewing geometry       
of an image scene. These parameters are stated in terms that an image         
analyst is accustomed to seeing and include parameters such as sub-           
spacecraft latitude and longitude; latitude and longitude of the center       
and four corners of the image; solar-incidence, emission, and phase           
angles; and solar azimuth. Other fields in the index tables include time      
of observation, spacecraft clock time, orbit number, volume and               
directory location  of the image in the archive, observational intent,        
names of calibration files to be used for an image, and other ancillary       
information.  The "user friendly" geometric parameters represent the          
approximate viewing of an image scene and is intended only for image          
search and retrieval. The primary and refined geometric data are stored       
in the SPICE kernel files in the archive. Geometric processing software       
extracts geometry data from the SPICE kernels and not the index table.        
The geometric elements of the SPICE kernels are not appropriate for           
search and retrieval methods in their primary form and therefore are not      
included in the index tables.                                                 
                                                                              
2.7 Documentation Elements                                                    
                                                                              
Documentation, stored as computer readable files, is an important             
supplement to the archive. The documentation includes mission,                
spacecraft, and instrument descriptions; calibration reports; Flight          
Operations and Science Team reports and memoranda; literature                 
references; and descriptions of the data products and archive contents.       
The documentation is critical for preservation of the knowledge of a          
mission after the active mission operations has been included. The            
documentation focuses on descriptions of aspects of the mission data          
that are not published in technical journals and are not available            
through standard published literature. These data are stored on the           
static and dynamic data volumes that accompany the EDR image archive.         
                                                                              
2.8 Software Elements                                                         
                                                                              
The software elements provide processing capabilities that address the        
unique data and instrument specific aspects of the Clementine images.         
There are four required elements: 1) software for image decompression,        
2) a processing capability for radiometric correction, 3) simple image        
display capability, and 4) a software toolkit to characterize the             
geometric properties of an image.                                             
                                                                              
Software for data decompression and simple image display exist on each        
EDR data volume. The radiometric correction software will exist on the        
dynamic data volumes when they are produced. The software that                
characterize the geometric roperties of an image is available through         
the PDS NAIF Node.                                                            
                                                                              
In order to serve a wide range of user communities with various levels        
of programming proficiencies, the archive software is portable across         
multiple computer platforms. The software exists as executable modules,       
for systems commonly used by the NASA planetary community (UNIX/SUN,          
IBM/PC, and Macintosh), and as source code. The source code can be            
adapted to meet the needs of other groups with different computer             
platforms. The source code also preserves the detailed decompression and      
radiometric correction algorithms.                                            
                                                                              
The decompression and radiometric-correction programs output PDS              
formatted image files so existing software systems, developed by other        
organizations, can be used to display and access the images.                  
                                                                              
The SPICE software Toolkit, distributed by the NAIF facility at JPL,          
provides the software capability for characterizing the geometric             
properties of the imaging instruments, and the viewing geometry of a          
scene. This toolkit is developed in FORTRAN and is portable across            
several computer platforms.                                                   
                                                                              
The CLEMDCMP program, for decompressing a Clementine image, is found in       
the <software> directory. This program has been developed and tested to       
run on PC/MS-DOS, SUN/UNIX, and Macintosh environments. The CLIMDISP          
program is include in the <software> directory tree for  image display        
for IBM/PC platforms. XV has been included to display images in the           
Sun/UNIX environment. IMAGE is also included to display images in the         
Macintosh environments. The "M-SHELL" system for PC/WINDOWS, is planned       
for inclusion on one of the ancillary data sets.                              
                                                                              
3. ARCHIVE DESIGN                                                             
                                                                              
3.1 PDS Standards                                                             
                                                                              
Data that comprise the Clementine Image Archive are formatted according       
to the standards of the Planetary Data System standard, version 3.0 as        
documented in the PDS Standards Reference manual [JPL Document D-7669].       
                                                                              
3.2  Static  and Dynamic Data volumes                                         
                                                                              
The Clementine data sets are placed into static and dynamic categories.       
Static data sets, once produced and validated, are not subject to update      
or modification. Dynamic data sets have the inherent property that they       
continue to evolve and improve as the knowledge of the mission                
parameters improve. These data sets are periodically updated or replaced      
with new versions, and are likely to be updated by post-mission data          
analysis programs. Examples of static data sets include the raw               
compressed images, the ancillary data that describe the camera modes.         
and errata files that describe problems encountered during production of      
the CD-ROM volumes. Once the raw images have been received, validated,        
and properly stored in an archive they will never change. Likewise, the       
camera modes, once properly recorded, will not change. Examples of            
dynamic data sets are calibration files for radiometric correction and        
the C-kernel  containing the camera pointing matrix. Calibration files        
continue to evolve as knowledge of the camera properties improves. The        
C-kernel is updated in geodetic and cartographic applications.                
                                                                              
In the archive, the static and dynamic data sets are physically               
separated into different volumes. The static data set, containing the         
raw planetary data make up virtually the entire archive volume set. The       
dynamic data sets (calibration files, and SPICE kernels) have modest          
storage requirements and can be stored on one or two volumes. Once the        
static volumes are created and validated, they need never be recreated        
or updated--a desirable quality for the volumes that make up most of the      
archive.  As the dynamic data sets are improved and updated, only the         
limited number of volumes dedicated to the dynamic data need to be            
redistributed. Mixing dynamic and static data sets on the same volumes        
would cause considerable logistic problems in maintaining the archive.        
                                                                              
3.3 Handling Errors                                                           
                                                                              
It is inevitable that errors will be introduced into the archive even         
with data validation procedures applied to the volumes. A plan is             
required to handle errors discovered in data volumes that have already        
been produced.                                                                
                                                                              
As errors are discovered, they are reported to the NRL Clementine data        
processing facility. An ERRATA report file is maintained to track and         
document all discovered errors. At the conclusion of the production of        
the Clementine volume set, a final CD-ROM is prepared that contains           
corrected files of all problem files.                                         
                                                                              
4. FILE NAMING CONVENTIONS                                                    
                                                                              
The file names developed for PDS data volumes are restricted to an 8          
character file name and a 3 character extension name with a period            
separating the file and extension names (this limitation is due to            
limited file naming scheme of Microsoft DOS). The general form of a file      
name is "msfxxxxy.rrr" for the Clementine imaging data. Table 3 provides      
the detailed naming convention for lunar mapping phase of mission. Table      
4 describes the file naming convention for non-lunar mapping phases.          
                                                                              
  Table 3 - File Name Convention, Lunar mapping phase: "msfxxxxy.rrr"         
                                                                              
            m = Mission Phase                                                 
                P = Prelaunch                                                 
                L = Lunar mapping                                             
                E = Earth mapping (LEO and phasing loops)                     
            s = Sensor                                                        
                A = Star tracker A                                            
                B = Star tracker B                                            
                U = UV/VIS                                                    
                H = Hi-Resolution sensor                                      
                N = Near infrared sensor                                      
                L = Long wavelength infrared sensor                           
            f = Filter wheel position (A, B, C, D, E, F)                      
            xxxx = Frame number within revolution                             
            y = Latitude bin for lunar mapping observations. This             
                character signifies a latitude range on the lunar             
                surface where the observation was made. The                   
                center latitude of the image defines the character:           
                A = -90 to -80      M = 30 to 40                              
                B = -80 to -70      N = 40 to 50                              
                C = -70 to -60      O = 50 to 60                              
                D = -60 to -50      P = 60 to 70                              
                E = -50 to -40      Q = 70 to 80                              
                F = -40 to -30      R = 80 to 90                              
                G = -30 to -20                                                
                H = -20 to -10      S = "unkown" targets                      
                I = -10 to   0                                                
                J =   0 to  10      T = Earth observations prior to           
                K =  10 to  20          systematic mapping                    
                L =  20 to  30      U = Sky observations prior to             
                                        systematic mapping                    
                                    V = Lunar observations prior to           
                                        systematic mapping                    
                                    W = Sky observations after                
                                        systematic mapping                    
                                    Y = Earth observations after              
                                        systematic mapping                    
                                    Z = Moon Observations after               
                                        systematic mapping                    
                                                                              
Table 4 - File Name Convention, non-Lunar mapping phase: "msfxxxxy.rrr"       
                                                                              
                                                                              
            m = Mission Phase                                                 
                P = Prelaunch                                                 
                L = Lunar mapping                                             
                E = Low Earth Orbit (LEO) mapping phase                       
            s = Sensor                                                        
                A = Star tracker A                                            
                B = Star tracker B                                            
                U = UV/VIS                                                    
                H = Hi-Resolution sensor                                      
                N = Near infrared sensor                                      
                L = Long wavelength infrared sensor                           
            f = Filter wheel position (A, B, C, D, E, F)                      
            xxxx = Frame sequence number within a down-load dump of           
                the spacecraft's solid state data recorder. The               
                The solid state data recorder, holding acquired images,       
                is periodically down-loaded to Earth.                         
                Images are numbered sequentially by time of observation.      
            y = Alpha character. Each 100 sequential images of a camera       
                are assigned an alpha character A-Z. This scheme used         
                to place 100 images per subdirectory.                         
            rrr  = Memory down-load sequence number. This number is           
                incremented by one each time a down-load is made of           
                the solid state data recorder within a mission phase.         
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
Examples of file names follow:                                                
                                                                              
LUA0323B.020 = Image was acquired during the Lunar mapping phase (L),         
               by the UV/VIS camera (U), with filter wheel position (A)       
               (blue filter), the image was the 323-rd image acquired         
               during orbit 20. The image falls within the latitude           
               range -80 to -70 (B).                                          
                                                                              
ENA0600B.001 = Image was acquire during the Low Earth Orbit phase             
               of mission (E) by the Near-Infrared camera (N), with           
               filter-wheel position A. It is the 600-th image acquired       
               for the first dump (001) of spacecraft's solid state           
               recorder. The image is in the second set of 100 images         
               acquired by the NIR camera (B).                                
                                                                              
5. DIRECTORY STRUCTURE AND CONTENTS FOR STATIC VOLUMES                        
                                                                              
Figure 1 shows the directory structure overview for the static volumes.       
Below the root directory are the  SOFTWARE, DOCUMENT, INDEX,  and orbit       
directories. Below the SOFTWARE directory are subdirectories for storing      
software for various hardware platforms. A detailed description of the        
directory tree is provide in Table 5. An ERRATA directory may exist on        
the final volume in order to hold any files that were improperly              
processed in the volume set. Empty directories are not included on the        
volume. For example, if a star tracker directory (example <LAXXXXXX>)         
contains no files for an orbit, the directory will not appear on the          
volume.                                                                       
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
             TABLE 5  Directory Structure Overview                            
                                                                              
                                <root>                                        
                                  |                                           
                                  |                                           
  ________________________________|___________________________________        
    |        |        |       |   |         |        |          |             
    |        |        |       |   |         |        |          |             
<SOFTWARE> <INDEX> <DOCUMENT> | <LUNxxx> <LUNxxx> <LUNxxx> <TIMELINE>         
    |                         |    |         |        |                       
    |_____________________<ERRATA> |         |        |                       
       |        |        |         |        etc.     etc.                     
       |        |        |         |                                          
     <PCDOS>  <MAC>    <SUNOS>     |                                          
       |        |        |         |                                          
       |        |        |         |                                          
       |       etc.     etc.       |                                          
       |                           |                                          
   ____|____________          _____|______________________________            
   |      |        |          |     |    |      |     |          |            
   |      |        |          |     |    |      |     |          |            
 <BIN> <SOURCE>  <DOC>   <LAXXXXXX> |<LBXXXXXX> | <LHXXXXXX>  <LLXXXXXX>      
                              |     |    |      |     |          |            
                              |     |    |      |     |          |            
                             etc.   |   etc.    |    etc.       etc.          
                                    |           |                             
                                <LUXXXXXX>  <LNXXXXXX>                        
                                    |           |                             
                                    |           |                             
                                    |          etc.                           
                                    |                                         
                                    |                                         
    ________________________________|__________________________________       
    |          |        |           |          |           |       |          
    |          |        |           |          |           |       |          
<LUXXXXXA> <LUXXXXB> <LUXXXXXC> <LUXXXXXD> <LUXXXXXE> <LUXXXXXF>  etc.        
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
5.1 Directory Contents                                                        
                                                                              
<root> Directory                                                              
                                                                              
     AAREADME.TXT - General information file. Provides users with             
     information about the Clementine image data products. Directs user       
     to other documents on the volume containing more detailed                
     information.                                                             
                                                                              
     VOLDESC.CAT  - PDS file containing labels that describe the volume       
     data products. Information includes: production date, producer name      
     and institution, volume ID, etc.                                         
                                                                              
     ERRATA.TXT - Text file for tracking and recording discovered errors      
     in the Clementine image data products. (This is an optional file.)       
                                                                              
                                                                              
<ERRATA> Directory                                                            
                                                                              
     The <ERRATA> directory tree is reserved for the last volume in the       
     static volume set of the archive. The tree stores data files that        
     correct files of previous files that had errors. The directory           
     tree maintains the same structure as on other volumes.                   
                                                                              
<DOCUMENT> Directory                                                          
                                                                              
     The documentation files exist in several forms in order to               
     facilitate access to the documents.                                      
     <> Files with extension 'TXT' or 'ASC' are ASCII text files              
        that can be read by virtually all text editors.                       
     <> Files with extension 'DOC' were created with Microsoft-word.          
     <> Files with extension 'EPS' are encapsulated PostScript format.        
                                                                              
                                                                              
     DOCINFO.TXT - Description of the DOCUMENT directory                      
                                                                              
     VOLINFO.* - The files contain detailed descriptions of the               
     Clementine mission, imaging instruments.                                 
                                                                              
                                                                              
     EDRSIS.* - Contains the Software Interface Specification for the         
     EDR Image data products. Different formats of EDRSIS exist.              
                                                                              
                                                                              
     ARCSIS.* - Contains the Software Interface Specification for the         
     Clementine Archive of EDR data products.                                 
                                                                              
<INDEX> Directory                                                             
                                                                              
     INDXINFO.TXT - Text file describing contents of <INDEX> directory        
                                                                              
     IMGINDX.TAB - The image index file is organized as a table: there        
     is a row for each image on the volume; the columns contain               
     parameters that describe the observation and camera states of the        
     images. Information includes viewing geometry (such as latitude and      
     longitude of the image center, sun and observation angles, etc.          
     and camera state information such as filter wheel position,              
     spacecraft  clock count, time of observation, image integration          
     time  (effective exposure time), and camera modes.                       
                                                                              
     IMGINDX.LBL - Detached PDS label for IMGINDEX.TAB. The image index       
     file is accompanied by a detached PDS label that describes its           
     organization and contents.                                               
                                                                              
     IMGINDX.HDR - Header file, used for spread sheet applications            
     for the image index file. This file contains a single line               
     that gives heading names to each row in the index file.                  
                                                                              
     MISSINDX.TAB - Table of missing images. Image file names in this         
     directory were lost during the active fight projects due to a            
     variety problems including: images not properly transmitted to           
     Earth, image files lost between ground receiving station and             
     mission operations center. Images listed in this directory               
     can not be recovered.                                                    
                                                                              
     MISSINDX.LBL - Detached PDS label that describes the MISSINDX.TAB        
     file.                                                                    
                                                                              
     MISSINDX.HDR - Header file used for spread sheet applications            
     for the missing image index file. This file contains a single line       
     that gives heading names to each row in the missing image                
     index file.                                                              
                                                                              
     REDOINDX.TAB - This index table may exist on a CD-ROM volume             
     in the <index> directory. If an image could not be recovered             
     from the telemetry archive before a volume was created, then             
     this table contains a list of the image files that will be               
     reprocessed for inclusion on the last volume. This file                  
     is identical in format to the IMGINDX.TAB file.                          
                                                                              
     REDOINDX.LBL - Detached label for REDOINDX.TAB                           
                                                                              
     REDOINDX.HDR - Header file used for spread sheet applications            
     for the image index file. This file contains a single line               
     that gives heading names to each row in the index file.                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                              
<SOFTWARE> Directory                                                          
                                                                              
     The software directory and sub-directories contain source code,          
     executable modules, and documentation for the programs available         
     to access and display the Clementine Images. These are simple            
     software tools and not meant to be comprehensive image                   
     processing applications. Simple access and display tools are             
     available for the SUN, PC, and MAC environments. Software for            
     each subdirectory is located in subdirectories. Please refer             
     to the  "SOFTINFO.TXT" files in the SOFTWARE directory tree for          
     information about each software element included in the Clementine       
     archive.                                                                 
                                                                              
     SOFTINFO.TXT - This file describes the contents of the SOFTWARE          
     directory.                                                               
                                                                              
                                                                              
<SOFTWARE.PCDOS>     - PC/DOS system                                          
<SOFTWARE.MAC>       - Macintosh system                                       
<SOFTWARE.SUNOS>     - SUN/UNIX system                                        
                                                                              
                                                                              
<LUNxxx> - Data Directory                                                     
                                                                              
     These are the top level directories for the EDR image data               
     products. The names of the data directories define the                   
     mission phase (LUN=Lunar, LEO=Low Earth Orbit EPA= prelunar              
     mapping phasing loops, EPB=postlunar mapping phasing loops).             
     The "xxx" characters refer to the revolution number for lunar            
     mapping phase, and solid state recorder  down-load dump  number          
     for non-lunar mapping phases. The subdirectories under this              
     directory divide the data by camera.                                     
                                                                              
                                                                              
<LUNxxx.LAXXXXXX> - Subdirectory of Star tracker A camera images              
<LUNxxx.LBXXXXXX> - Subdirectory of Star tracker B camera images              
<LUNxxx.LHXXXXXX> - Subdirectory of Hi-Resolution camera images               
<LUNxxx.LNXXXXXX> - Near Infrared camera images                               
<LUNxxx.LLXXXXXX> - Long Wavelength Infrared camera images                    
<LUNxxx.LUXXXXXX> - UV/Visible camera images                                  
                                                                              
                                                                              
<LUNxxx.LAXXXXXX.LUXXXXXA>                                                    
<LUNxxx.LAXXXXXX.LUXXXXXB>                                                    
<LUNxxx.LAXXXXXX.LUXXXXXV>                                                    
etc.                                                                          
                                                                              
     The directory tree is further subdivided by into additional              
     subdirectories so that there are no more than 256                        
     images per directory. For the lunar mapping phase of the mission,        
     images acquired in a revolution are divided into 10 degree               
     latitude bins. Each subdirectory contains all the data in a 10           
     degree bin. (A=-90 to -80, B=-80 to -70, C=-70 to -60, etc.)             
                                                                              
<TIMELINE>                                                                    
     This directory was added as part of the volume just when production      
     of the volume series began. Because of the late addition of the          
     files contained in this directory, they do not conform to                
     PDS standards. Because these files are supplemental to the               
     overall requirements of the volume design, it was decided that           
     PDS requirements were not required.  The timeline data, provided         
     in PDS compliant format, will be made available through the SPICE        
     system on the Clementine ancillary CD-ROM series.                        
                                                                              
     TLINFO.TXT - Description of the time line data available for             
     each lunar orbit.                                                        
                                                                              
     TLLUNxxx.XLS - Microsoft EXCEL spread sheet file of the                  
     time line data for orbit 'xxx'. TLEPAxxx files for earth                 
     phasing loop A data, TLEPBxxx files for earth phasing loop B             
     data, TLLEOxxx for low earth orbit data.                                 
