PDS_VERSION_ID        = PDS3
RECORD_TYPE           = STREAM
OBJECT                = TEXT
  PUBLICATION_DATE    = 1998-09-12
  NOTE                = "Anomalies and discrepancies in the
    CD Volume set"
END_OBJECT            = TEXT
END

#################################################################

                             CD COUNT

Documents on previous HiRes Mosaic CDs refer to the total CD 
count as 20, consistent with a single CD per pole, each using all 
available data pertinent to a given pole. However, it was decided 
during completion of the polar mosaics to generate separate 
mosaics for apoapsis and periapsis data, which provides a more 
uniform appearance and quality.  This brings the total CD count 
to 22.


                      IMAGE NAMING CONVENTION

Clementine HiRes mosaics produced at 20 m/pixel scale have names 
starting with "H"; this is not consistent with the naming scheme 
developed by the USGS, which recently designated "E" for 20 
m/pixel Clementine products.

Also, although the USGS has no designation for 30 m/pixel scale, 
the use of "G" for the 30 m/pixel polar mosaics is contrary to 
the USGS arrangement in which resolution decreases with 
alphabetic order.


                MISSING UV/Vis SUB-POLAR CONTEXT

A very few of the sub-polar mosaic JPEG context images appear to 
have portions missing UV/Vis data. These "holes" are, in fact, 
present in the original UV/Vis basemaps and represent lack of 
UV/Vis and NIR images of sufficient quality.


                           MISCELLANEOUS

The following ancillary file errors are found on CL_6019 and 
CL_6021:

   1. Missing END statement in dsmap.cat.

   2. Missing closing quote for MCEWENETAL1997 reference in 
refs.cat.

   3. Missing closing quote for column 1's description section.



                 ADDITIONAL ERRATA INFORMATION

Presented below are discussions by Eric Eliason which address, 
first, discrepancies in cartographic offset parameter definitions 
in the various planetary DIMs and, second, variations in file 
name conventions and the impact of this with ISO-9660 CD 
standards.

#################################################################

DISCREPANCIES OF PROJECTION OFFSET PARAMETERS AMONG USGS-PRODUCED
                     PLANETARY DIGITAL GLOBAL MAPS

                           Eric M. Eliason
                              7/1/1997

The Issue
---------

This report discusses discrepancies in map projection parameters 
found in the PDS labels on the Mars MDIM, Magellan F-Map (Venus), 
and Clementine Base Map Mosaic (Earth's Moon) produced by the 
USGS Astrogeology Team. This report is important for individuals 
needing to know the precise definition of the map projection and 
cartographic parameters that describe the image map. There are 
differences in the cartographic parameters in each of the data 
products that effect the algorithms defining the relationship 
between line and sample position in the image array and the 
latitude and longitude position on the planet surface.  
Specifically, the LINE_PROJECTION_OFFSET and 
SAMPLE_PROJECTION_OFFSET parameters have inconsistent definitions 
among these data sets.

Additionally, as discussed below there are differences in the 
keywords names used to describe the map projection parameters on 
the PDS labels due to the evolution of PDS standards.

Data Products In Question
-------------------------

The Mars MDIM, Magellan F-Map, and Clementine Basemap Mosaic 
exist on CD media and are available for wide distribution to the 
NASA science community. These data sets contain global Mosaicked 
Digital Image Models (MDIM). The data sets are organized 
according to a "tiling"  scheme that divides the planet into 
tiles (or quadrangles). Each tile represents a specific area on 
the planet.  A tile is stored as a PDS-labeled image file. For 
more information on the data products, refer to the "volinfo.txt" 
file located in the document directory on the CD volume sets. 
[Note: The Clementine HiRes Mosaics also adopt the same keyword 
convention.]

Cartographic Keywords in the PDS Labels
---------------------------------------
The "IMAGE_MAP_PROJECTION" object contained in a PDS label 
provides the cartographic parameters necessary to define any map 
projection.  For the Sinusoidal Equal-Area Projection only a 
subset of the cartographic keywords are required and parameters 
not applicable will contain "N/A" in the fields. The list below 
shows a typical IMAGE_MAP_PROJECTION group of keywords. For 
precise definitions of the keywords, refer to the volinfo.txt 
file (located in the document directory) and the dsmap.cat file 
(located in the catalog directory.)

OBJECT                         = IMAGE_MAP_PROJECTION
  ^DATA_SET_MAP_PROJECTION     = "DSMAP.CAT"
  MAP_PROJECTION_TYPE          = SINUSOIDAL
  MAP_RESOLUTION               = 1408.1316 <PIXEL/DEGREE>
  MAP_SCALE                    = 0.075 <KM/PIXEL>
  MAXIMUM_LATITUDE             = 38.00000
  MINIMUM_LATITUDE             = 35.99000
  EASTERNMOST_LONGITUDE        = 146.01088
  WESTERNMOST_LONGITUDE        = 144.00000
  LINE_PROJECTION_OFFSET       = -53510.0039
  SAMPLE_PROJECTION_OFFSET     = -6837.0801
  A_AXIS_RADIUS                = 6051.00 <KM>
  B_AXIS_RADIUS                = 6051.00 <KM>
  C_AXIS_RADIUS                = 6051.00 <KM>
  FIRST_STANDARD_PARALLEL      = "N/A"
  SECOND_STANDARD_PARALLEL     = "N/A"
  POSITIVE_LONGITUDE_DIRECTION = EAST
  CENTER_LATITUDE              = 0.00000
  CENTER_LONGITUDE             = 150.00000
  REFERENCE_LATITUDE           = "N/A"
  REFERENCE_LONGITUDE          = "N/A"
  LINE_FIRST_PIXEL             = 1
  SAMPLE_FIRST_PIXEL           = 1
  LINE_LAST_PIXEL              = 2830
  SAMPLE_LAST_PIXEL            = 2410
  MAP_PROJECTION_ROTATION      = 0.00000
  VERTICAL_FRAMELET_OFFSET     = 1
  HORIZONTAL_FRAMELET_OFFSET   = 6
END_OBJECT                     = IMAGE_MAP_PROJECTION
END

Because of the change in PDS standards the IMAGE_MAP_PROJECTION 
group is different between the Mars MDIM products and the 
Magellan F-Map and Lunar MDIM products. The Mars MDIM products 
were created before the "final" cartographic projection keywords 
were defined and so they are different from the F-MAP and Lunar 
MDIM products. Here is a list of the differences in keyword 
names:

Mars MDIM Label                       F-MAP / Lunar MDIM Label
-----------------------------------------------------------------
IMAGE_ID (in main label body)   changed to PRODUCT_ID
IMAGE_MAP_PROJECTION_CATALOG    changed to IMAGE_MAP_PROJECTION
DATA_SET_MAP_PROJECTION_CATALOG changed to 
   DATA_SET_MAP_PROJECTION
X_AXIS_FIRST_PIXEL              changed to LINE_LAST_PIXEL
X_AXIS_LAST_PIXEL               changed to LINE_LAST_PIXEL
Y_AXIS_FIRST_PIXEL              changed to SAMPLE_FIRST_PIXEL
Y_AXIS_LAST_PIXEL               changed to SAMPLE_LAST_PIXEL
X_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET        changed to LINE_PROJECTION_OFFSET
Y_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET        changed to 
   SAMPLE_PROJECTION_OFFSET

Discrepancies with Offset Parameters
-------------------------------------
The LINE_PROJECTION_OFFSET and SAMPLE_PROJECTION_OFFSET 
parameters have inconsistent definitions among the Clementine, F-
Map and Mars MDIM data products. This section describes the 
differences.

For the Mars MDIM, the offset parameters (called 
X_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET and Y_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET) are used 
to define line and sample number as a function of latitude and 
longitude:

line   = INT(X_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET - LAT*MAP_RESOLUTION + 1.0)

sample = INT(Y_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET - (LON -
         CENTER_LONGITUDE)*MAP_RESOLUTION*COS(LAT) + 1.0)

Note that the addition of 1.0 is part of the equation. This means 
the X_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET and Y_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET are 
relative to line and sample 0,0 in the image array. Because the 
direction of positive longitude is to the west for Mars, there is 
a "-" after the Y_AXIS_PROJECTION_OFFSET in the equation.

For the F-MAP and Clementine basemap the equations are defined 
as:

line   = INT(LINE_PROJECTION_OFFSET - LAT*MAP_RESOLUTION)

sample = INT(SAMPLE_PROJECTION_OFFSET + (LON -
         CENTER_LONGITUDE)*MAP_RESOLUTION*COS(LAT))

Note that the addition of 1.0 is not part of the equation. This 
means that the offset parameters are relative to line and sample 
1,1. Because the direction of positive longitude is to the east 
for Venus and the Moon, there is a "+"  after the 
SAMPLE_PROJECTION_OFFSET term.

An additional discrepancy exists in the F-MAP volume set. The 
LINE_PROJECTION_OFFSET and SAMPLE_PROJECTION_OFFSET parameters 
are actually the negative of the value that they should be.  A 
software patch has been included on the F-MAP CD-ROMs to correct 
the projection offset keywords. The name of the program is PATH 
and it is stored in the SOFTWARE directory on the F-MAP volumes.

#################################################################
#################################################################

       UPPER-CASE AND LOWER-CASE FILE NAMES AND DIRECTORIES
                     ON CD VOLUMES THAT CONFORM TO
                        THE ISO-9660 STANDARDS

                           Eric M. Eliason
                              3/1/1997

Names of files stored on an ISO-9660 formatted CD are different 
among computer systems and operating systems. Some systems use 
lower-case file names while other systems use upper-case file 
names. Here is a list of how popular operating behave with file 
names:

Sun/Solaris    - File names and folders are lower-case lettering
Macintosh      - File names and folders are upper-case lettering
PC/Windows 95  - File names and folders have the first letter
                 upper-case followed by lower-case lettering.
PC/MS-DOS      - File names and folders are upper-case lettering
PC/Windows 3.1 - File names and folders are lower-case lettering

Because of the inconsistent case lettering of file names it was 
decided to provide file and volume names in the image index file 
(imgindx.tab) and the source image index file (srcindx.tab) to 
upper-case lettering. Users desiring to build applications around 
these tables will need to convert the file name to the 
appropriate case for their systems.

#################################################################
#################################################################

         VALIDATION PERFORMED BY THE PLANETARY DATA SYSTEM

                          Eric Eliason
                            9/25/99


The anomalies reported here are intended primarily for data 
product developers that might use the Clementine HiRes CD-ROMs as 
a model for future data products. The original peer review of 
these data products did not identify the items listed below as 
problems and are considered inconsequential to the overall 
usefulness of the data.

1) PDS standards require all files to be labeled. The following 
files should have been provided with a PDS label:
brwstxt.htm, 
clemlogo.gif, 
index.htm,
msss.gif,
All *.htm and *.jpg located in the browse subdirectory of each 
volume.

2) The index files located in the index directory of these 
volumes do not fully comply with PDS naming conventions:  
imgindx.lbl should be named imgindex.lbl
imgindx.tab should be named imgindex.tab
srcindx.lbl should be named srcindex.lbl
srcindx.tab should be named srcindex.tab

3) The html files on these volumes have unix-style line 
terminators (line-feed characters at the end of each line) but 
should have used the DOS-style convention of carriage-return 
line-feed characters to mark the end of each line.
