# Clementine Imaging Bundle README file

## introduction

This bundle contains observational products from and documentation on the Deep
Space Program Science Experiment's Clementine-1 orbiter ("Clementine"). This
bundle includes both 'raw' experiment data record (EDR) data and gridded,
map-projected mosaic products. The EDR data were collected between January and
May 1994, during Clementine's two Earth 'phasing loop' flybys, lunar
insertion, systematic lunar mapping, and transfer back to Earth orbit. They
end on May 7, 1994, when a catastrophic attitude control failure caused the
termination of the remainder of Clementine's planned observations. The mosaic
products were subsequently produced and published between 1995 and 1998.

The Clementine orbiter was formally managed as a collaboration between the
Ballistic Missile Defense Organization /  Strategic Defense Initiative
Organization and NASA, administered from Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory and the US Naval Research Laboratory. The products in this archive
were originally generated by personnel from an impressively broad array of
organizations, including but not limited to USGS Astrogeology, the RAND
Corporation, Northwestern University, Malin Space Science Systems, the
University of Arizona, Applied Coherent Technology, JPL, and the University of
Hawaii.

We suggest that users who are generally familiar with Clementine and its
imaging  products  move directly to the collection readme files:
/document/document_readme.md and /data/data_readme.md. They give descriptions
of collection structure and file formats; they also provide a variety of
useful cautionary notes about the data.

Users who are unfamiliar with Clementine might want to begin by examining the
mission, host, and instrument catalog files in /document/catalog/ before
moving on to the collection readme files.  (Please note that several other
files in that directory are partially deprecated by this archive.) A great
deal of other useful high-level introductory information on Clementine can be
found at the NSSDC's website: 
https://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/nmc/spacecraft/displayExperiment.action?spacecraftId=1994-004A


## sources

This bundle is a translation and modernization of the five PDS3 data sets
originally collected in the "Mission to the Moon" archive (MttMA) Volume
Series and currently held by the PDS Imaging Node (IMG): 

* CLEM1-L/E/Y-A/B/U/H/L/N-2-EDR-V1.0 (raw / EDR data; the long series of
letters  designates the mission phases and instruments included in the
archive)
* CLEM1-L-U-5-DIM-BASEMAP-V1.0 (single-band 'basemap' mosaic used as a
geometric reference for subsequent mosaic products, based on images taken
using the Clementine Ultraviolet/Visible Camera (UVVIS)'s 750-nm filter)
* CLEM1-L-U-5-DIM-UVVIS-V1.0 (multispectral mosaic from UVVIS)
* CLEM1-L-N-5-DIM-NIR-V1.0 (multispectral mosaic from the Clementine
Near-Infrared Camera (NIR))
* CLEM1-L-H-5-DIM-MOSAIC-V1.0 (single-band 'strip' mosaic generated from
images taken using the Clementine High-Resolution Camera (HIRES)'s 750-nm
filter)

The MttMA was originally distributed as a series of several hundred CD-ROMs
referred to as 'Archive Volumes' (AVs), and the MttMA components are sometimes
also described by reference to the volume numbers of these CDs. This bundle
includes files from AV ranges CL_0001 - CL_0088 (EDR), CL_3001 - CL_3015
(basemap), CL_4001 - CL_4078 (UVVIS mosaic), CL_5001 - CL-5078 (NIR mosaic),
and CL_6001 - CL_6022 (HIRES mosaic).

The data in this bundle have been extensively reformatted and reorganized for
modernization, PDS4 compliance, and usability. Notes on differences between
the contents and organization of this bundle and its source data sets are
included in the collection readmes.


## MttMA data not in this bundle

The Clementine reduced LIDAR, reduced Longwave Infrared Camera (LWIR),
Moon-Earth bistatic radar reflection, and SPICE data sets were also designated
as components of the MttMA, but are not held by IMG; products from the
following data sets are **not** included in this bundle:

* CLEM1-L-LIDAR-5-TOPO-V1.0 [at GEO]
* CLEM1-L-LWIR-3-RDR-V1.0 [at GEO]
* CLEM1-L-RSS-1-BSR-V1.0 [at GEO]
* CLEM1-L-RSS-5-BSR-V1.0 [at GEO]
* CLEM1-L-RSS-5-GRAVITY-V1.0 [at GEO]
* CLEM1-L-SPICE-6-V1.0 [at NAIF]

(The LWIR EDR data, however, **are** included in this bundle.)


**NOTE TO REVIEWERS / CURATING FACILITY:**  *we leave it up to you to decide
how and whether to reference / include conversion software. We suggest
something like: "For a full specification of the conversion process, please
refer to the conversion software itself, externally hosted at..." --Million
Concepts*
