PDS_VERSION_ID                        = PDS3

OBJECT     = INSTRUMENT

INSTRUMENT_HOST_ID                    = CLEM1
INSTRUMENT_ID                         = HIRES


OBJECT     = INSTINFO

INSTRUMENT_NAME                 = "HIGH RESOLUTION CAMERA"
INSTRUMENT_TYPE                 = CAMERA
INSTRUMENT_DESC                 = "


    Instrument Overview
    ===================

      The High Resolution Imaging (Hires) camera combines a 
lightweight beryllium telescope with an image intensifier-coupled 
frame transfer CCD imager. Image shuttering is accomplished 
through voltage gating of the image intensifier.  Maximum 
integration time is 733 milliseconds in 10.67 microsecond 
increments.  Spectral response is limited in the system by the S-2 
photocathode between 0.4 and 0.8 microns. Five spectral bands can 
be selected from a filter wheel which is controlled through the 
same serial-addressable synchronous interface (SASI).  A sixth 
filter position is allocated to an opaque filter for the 
protection of the photocathode and image intensifier.

      The post-FPA electronics allow three gain states followed by 
5 bits of offset that span 248 counts in the analog regime to 
augment the basic 8-bit A/D conversion.  Images of the day side of 
the moon used intensifier gate times with relatively low gain 
settings on the order of 1 millisecond.  Lifetime concerns about 
the photocathode and micro channel plates in the intensifier unit 
drove operational settings to low exposures. This resulted in 
photon shot noise significantly contributing to the overall noise 
in the Hires sensor. Additionally, the image intensifier imposed a 
nonuniformity on images. This yielded images that did not compress 
well using the MATRA optimized rms algorithm. For this reason, 
JPEG compression, which discards high spatial frequency detail, 
was employed on the Hires images.

      The Hires performance specifications are provided below.


    Calibration
    ===========

      The radiometric calibration converts the digitized signal 
received from the camera (DN value) into a quantity that is 
proportional to the radiance reaching the sensor.  The sensitivity 
of the CCD focal plane array varies across the field of view but 
appears to be time invariant during the two month lunar 
observation period.   However, reliable pre-flight calibrations 
for the Hires camera are not available. The high shot noise due to 
in-flight use of low gains to preserve the camera system's 
lifetime, together with spurious 'honeycomb' nonuniformities 
imposed by the intensifier tube make the task of finding reliable 
in-flight calibrations most daunting, and have forced a more 
empirical photometric calibration.

      The Hires geometric and photometric calibrations were 
referenced to the UVVIS Basemap Mosaic.  The geometric calibration 
was achieved through a constrained registration of map-projected, 
nadir-pointed Hires images against the UVVIS Basemap Mosaic, which 
is the de facto lunar control network. An approximate photometric 
calibration was performed on Hires mosaic tiles of sufficiently 
limited extent (1.75 degrees of latitude) that the photometric 
response was approximately constant.  Then, the linear stretch 
which matches the underlying UVVIS Baseline Mosaic approximates 
the photometric calibration of the Hires tile.



    Operational Considerations
    ==========================

      The pole-to-pole lunar observations provided scenes with a 
broad range of viewing conditions, ranging from bright 
observations near zero phase angle at the equator to very low 
light-level observations at the poles.  In order to properlyrecord 
an observation with an optimal signal-to-noise ratio it is 
important to adequately fill the 8-bit (255 levels) dynamic range 
of the A/D camera output.  The integration time (exposure time) 
and the gain and offset settings of the instrument were adjusted 
to properly record each image.  During the systematic mapping, the 
gain state of the camera was normally set to lower values for the 
mid-latitude observations and set to higher levels (thereby 
increasing the sensitivity of the A/D converter) at the higher 
latitudes.  Integration times were rarely increased as 
observations approached the poles, nominally being set to 1.067 
ms.  Lunar observations were broken into 10 latitude bins.  Each 
latitude bin nominally contained fixed gain and offset modes and 
integration times for each camera/filter combination, although 
occasional offlooking slews that fell within a bin other than that 
corresponding to the subspacecraft point resulted in images with 
differing acquisition settings.

      The Clementine orbit was designed to provide overlapping 
coverage in both the down-track (~15% overlap) and cross-track 
(~10% overlap at the equator) directions.  The image overlap is 
necessary to geometrically control images in cartographic 
applications.


    Operational Modes
    =================
      High Resolution Imaging (Hires) camera: The Hires camera 
combines a lightweight beryllium telescope with an image 
intensifier-coupled frame transfer CCD imager. Image shuttering is 
accomplished through voltage gating of the image intensifier.  
Maximum integration time is 733 milliseconds in  10.67 microsecond 
increments. Spectral response is limited in the system by the S-2 
photocathode between 0.4 and 0.8 microns. Five spectral bands can 
be selected from a filter wheel which is controlled through the 
same SASI interface. A sixth filter position is allocated to an 
opaque filter for the image intensifier's protection.

      The HIRES camera had four operating modes:

      1.  Programmable integration time.  The range of integration 
          times is 1-733 milliseconds.

      2.  Gain Mode.  The gain mode represents the multiplicative 
          constant applied to the image data passing through the 
          A/D converter.  Three gain state settings were available 
          (1,2,5). Gain setting 5, which represented the lowest 
          setting, was used almost constantly during lunar 
          observations due to lifetime considerations of the 
          imaging system.

       3.  Offset Mode.  The offset mode represents the additive 
           constant applied to the image data passing through the 
           A/D converter.

       4.  Intensifier Gain  Mode.  The intensifier gain mode 
           represents the multiplicative gain of the image 
           intensifier.  The precise behavior of the gain is, 
           however, not known.


    Camera Specifications
    =====================

      Focal Plane Array:
      -------------------
      Type              Si Charge Coupled Device
                        Thomson TH7863-CRU
      Pixel format      288x384
      Pixel size        23x23 microns
      Readout rate      4MHz

      Optics:
      -------------------
      Clear aperture    131 nm
      Speed             F/9.5
      
      Imaging:
      -------------------
      Wavelength          0.4 to 0.8 microns
      Field of view       0.4 deg. x 0.3 deg.
      Pixel IFOV         18 microradians
      Point spread        4 pixels
      Filters           415 nm cw (+/- 20 nm)     ('A')
                        560 nm cw (+/- 5)         ('B')
                        650 nm cw (+/- 5)         ('C')
                        750 nm cw (+/- 10)        ('D')
                        400 to 800 nm broadband   ('E')
                        (opaque)                  ('F')
      
      Image intensifier:
      -------------------
      Module                General Atomics 0131-Z12-2-009
      Useful photocathode 
       diameter               12 mm
      Luminous gain         1000 fL/fC
      Limiting resolution     40 lp/mm
      Gain control             8 bits
      
      
      
      Camera Electronics:
      -------------------
      A/D resolution    8 bits
      Frame rate        10 Hz
      Readout time      27.4 ms
      Integration time  0.2-733 ms
      Digitization gain 150,350,1000 electrons/count
      Offset control    248 gray levels
      Power             9.5 W
      
      Mechanical:
      Mass              1120 grams
      Envelope          17.0 cm x 18.1 cm x 36.4 cm

"
END_OBJECT = INSTINFO

OBJECT = INSTREFINFO
REFERENCE_KEY_ID = "KORDASETAL1995"
END_OBJECT = INSTREFINFO

END_OBJECT = INSTRUMENT

END
