PDS_VERSION_ID                     = PDS3
RECORD_TYPE                        = STREAM
SPACECRAFT_NAME                    = "CLEMENTINE 1"
TARGET_NAME                        = MOON
OBJECT                             = DATA_SET
  DATA_SET_ID                      = "CLEM1-L-H-5-DIM-MOSAIC-V1.0"

  OBJECT                           = DATA_SET_INFORMATION
    DATA_SET_NAME                  = "CLEMENTINE HIRES MOSAIC"
    DATA_SET_COLLECTION_MEMBER_FLG = "N"
    START_TIME                     = "N/A"
    STOP_TIME                      = "N/A"
    DATA_SET_RELEASE_DATE          = 1998-09-12
    PRODUCER_FULL_NAME             = "DR. MICHAEL C. MALIN"
    DETAILED_CATALOG_FLAG          = "N"
    DATA_OBJECT_TYPE               = "IMAGE"
    DATA_SET_DESC                  = "

    Data Set Overview
    =================
      This CD contains portions of the Clementine HiRes Lunar 
Mosaic, a geometrically controlled, calibrated mosaic compiled from 
non-uniformity corrected, 750 nanometer ('D') filter high 
resolution observations from the HiRes imaging system onboard the 
Clementine Spacecraft. These mosaics cover sub-polar regions 
between 80 deg S and 80 deg N with the sinusoidal equal area 
mapping at 20 m/pixel, and the polar regions above 80 deg with a 
stereographic mapping at 30 m/pixel resolution at the poles.  The 
geometric control is provided by the 100 m/pixel USGS Clementine 
Basemap Mosaic (PDS CD-ROM Volumes CL_3001-3015) compiled from the 
750 nm Ultraviolet/Visible Clementine imaging system and, for the 
polar mosaics, from the 150 m/pixel polar basemap mosaic. 
Calibration was achieved by removing image nonuniformity largely 
due to the HiRes system's light intensifier. Also provided are  
offset and scale factors which transform the 8-bit HiRes data to 
approximate photometric units, achieved by a fit of the HiRes data 
to the corresponding UV/Vis basemap, which is photometrically 
calibrated.

      The mosaic on this CD covers polar regions above 80 degrees.  
The mosaics are divided into square tiles 2250 pixels on a side, 
which spans approximately 2.2 degrees.

      This CD also contains ancillary data files that support the 
HiRes Mosaic.  These files include browse images with UV/Vis 
context stored in a JPEG format, HTML documents that support a web 
browser interface to the CDs, index files ('imgindx.tab' and 
'srcindx.tab') that tabulate the contents of the CD, and 
documentation files. For more information on the contents and 
organization of the CD volume set refer to the 'FILES, DIRECTORIES 
AND DISK CONTENTS' section of this document.

      Using a web browser open the 'index.htm' file located in the 
'root' directory of the CD. The html document will direct you to 
other informational documents and the image browser for rapidly 
viewing the image collection.

    Parameters
    ==========
      N/A


    Processing
    ==========
      Processing proceeded an orbital and latitude 'bin' basis, 
reflecting the organization of the Clementine EDR CDs. A latitude 
bin comprises all images of a given orbit deemed to fall within a 
10 degree latitude range based on SPICE information. The latitude 
ranges are defined to fall on on 10-degree boundaries from -90 to 
+90. For the sub-polar mosaics, map projection of images from a 
given orbit used the same central longitude, taken to be the 
orbit's longitude at the lunar equator. Images used in the polar 
mosaics were warped to a common stereographic projection relative 
to the pertinent pole.

      The HiRes Mosaic processing comprised 5 steps: (1) Image 
calibration, map project and basemap generation; (2) Low resolution 
registration against the UV/Vis basemap; (3) High resolution 
registration against overlapping images; (4) Constrained placement 
combining high- and low-resolution registrations; and (5) HiRes 
mosaic and photometric calibration estimation.

      Placement and calibration for the polar mosaics differed in 
some regards from those of the sub-polar mosaics. Due to 
illumination paucity, various polar locales lacked useful geometric 
and photometric control. In these regions, registration between 
individual HiRes frames, both with and among orbits, was the 
primary placement guide. Such placement was anchored to images 
which did have reliable registration against the UV/Vis basemap.  
For convenience, rectangular zones centered on the poles were 
defined within which placement proceeded in this manner.

      Similarly, the basemap photometric calibration was considered 
unreliable at the highest latitudes, and so for a given HiRes polar 
mosaic, a single calibration (based on well-illuminated tiles and 
basemap portions) was adopted for the entire mosaic, rather than 
defining one for each individual tile.

    Media/Format
    ============
      The Clementine basemap is delivered to the Planetary Data
      System using CD media.  Formats are based on standards for
      such products established by the Planetary Data System (PDS)
      [PDSSR1992].  "

  CONFIDENCE_LEVEL_NOTE            = "
  =====================
      Geometric Accuracy
      ------------------
      The geometric placement of the HiRes Mosaics is based 
primarily onregistration with the Clementine Basemap Mosaic, which 
has accuracies approaching the UV/Vis scale. The UV/Vis accuracy is 
discussed below, drawing extensively from the UV/Vis Basemap Mosaic 
documents.

      The goal of the  UV/Vis basemap was for 95% of the Moon 
(excluding the oblique observation gap fills) to have better than 
0.5 km/pixel absolute positional accuracy and to adjust the camera 
angles so that all frames match neighboring frames to within an 
accuracy of 2 pixels.

      Approximately 265,000 match points were collected at the USGS 
from ~43,000 UV/Vis images,  providing global coverage. About 80% 
of these points were collected via autonomous procedures, whereas 
the 20% required the more time consuming but highly accurate manual 
pattern-recognition.
      The oblique gap-fill images were the most difficult to match, 
and required substantial human intervention. Matching the polar 
regions was time-consuming because each frame overlaps many other 
frames.  Most match points were found to a precision of 0.2 pixels.

      The USGS match points were sent to RAND corporation for 
analytical triangulations. Using these match points, control points 
from the Apollo region, and the latest NAIF/SPICE information, RAND 
determined improved camera orientation angles for the global set of 
UV/Vis images. A spherical Moon of constant radius (1737.4 
kilometers) was assumed, which was a significant source of error 
near the oblique gap fills. The analytical triangulation is a 
least-squares formulation designed to adjust the latitude and 
longitude of the control points and the camera orientation angles 
to best fit the match points.  The final (global) analytical 
triangulation required solving ~660,000 normal equations. The mean 
error is less than 1 pixel. This is by far the largest analytical 
triangulation ever applied to a planetary body other than Earth. 
The results fully define the planimetric geometry of the basemap, 
to which future systematic products, such as the present HiRes 
Mosaic, should be tied.

      Accurate placement of the map-projected HiRes images was 
accomplished by combining registration to the UV/Vis basemap at the 
basemap's resolution (100 m/pixel and 150 m/pixel) with 
registration of overlapping HiRes pairs at five times this 
resolution (20 m/pixel and 30 m/pixel). The registrations were 
facilitated with automated image correlation.  These registrations 
were combined in a Least Absolute Deviation fit [BARRODALE1980] 
constrained to stray no further than some small amount from the 
basemap-scale registration. Use of the least absolute deviation 
gives outliers less importance than does a least squares fit. 
Further manual placement of 1-5 percent of the image was required; 
these were due either to poor initial placement, particularly when 
the scene was featureless and provided few or no overlapping 
features with the UV/Vis basemap, or to mismatches of scene, 
resolution or illumination across seams in the UV/Vis mosaic.  Some 
misregistration of adjacent HiRes images remains in the final 
mosaic because the paramount goal was registration with the 
underlying UV/Vis Basemap Mosaic.

      As described above, the HiRes polar mosaics lacked Uv/Vis 
basemap registration in shadowed regions, most notably at and 
immediately adjacent to the poles.  In such locales, the placment 
of HiRes images was guided primarily by registration of individual 
HiRes frames within and among orbits. Such placement was applied 
within approximately 2 degrees of the poles.

      Radiometric Units
      =================
      To date, absolute photometric calibration of the HiRes image 
data remains elusive. This seems particularly problematic for the 
bulk of HiRes images, which were noisy due to the low gain setting 
intended to extend the lifetime of the imaging system. For these 
reasons, a piece-wise intensity matching of the HiRes Mosaics to 
the UV/Vis Basemap Mosaic was adopted as an approximate radiometric 
calibration. The further decision was made to use 750 nm ('D') 
filter HiRes images in order to best match the UV/Vis Basemap 
Mosaic, which dominantly comprises 750 nm ('B') filter images. A 
more detailed description of the UV/Vis basemap photometric 
calibration may be found on the UV/Vis basemap volumes CL_30XX.

      Whereas sub-polar HiRes tiles were individually calibrated 
against the underlying UV/Vis basemap, each of the four HiRes polar 
mosaics have a single calibration for all tiles.  This is due to 
the difficulties associated with calibrating regions perennially in 
shadow, which renders some portions of the underlying polar basemap 
calibration unreliable. To mitigate this problem, a well-
illuminated tile and basemap portion near 85 deg latitude from each 
mosaic was adopted as calibration references.

      This calibration is embodied by the header values of the 
OFFSET and SCALING_FACTOR entries, which defines HiRes fractional 
reflectances:

        HIRES MOSAIC FRACTIONAL_REFLECTANCE = (SCALING_FACTOR * DN) 
+ OFFSET
        where: DN = 8-bit pixel value of HiRes mosaic image array.
               SCALING_FACTOR units are fractional reflectance per 
DN
               OFFSET units are fractional reflectance 


      The calibration in every case included correction for the 
non-uniformity of the raw HiRes images due to the light 
intensifier."

  END_OBJECT                       = DATA_SET_INFORMATION

  OBJECT                           = DATA_SET_TARGET
    TARGET_NAME                    = MOON
  END_OBJECT                       = DATA_SET_TARGET

  OBJECT                           = DATA_SET_HOST
    INSTRUMENT_HOST_ID             = CLEM1
    INSTRUMENT_ID                  = HIRES
  END_OBJECT                       = DATA_SET_HOST

  OBJECT                           = DATA_SET_REFERENCE_INFORMATION
    REFERENCE_KEY_ID               = "PDSSR1992"
  END_OBJECT                       = DATA_SET_REFERENCE_INFORMATION

 END_OBJECT                         = DATA_SET

END
